---
title: "Chapter 2: Writing an Export Business Plan"
date: 2022-02-18T20:00:22+05:30
draft: true
---

## Three Types of Export Business Plans

Now you’re ready to get organized and create your own plan. To keep the process manageable, let’s look at three different types of sample template plans, each with distinct advantages for business people with different needs. Pick the one that works best for you, keeping in mind that you can shorten the analysis while keeping the major components of the plan intact.

**Q:** What are the three export business plans?

**Ans:**

1. The back-of-the-napkin export business plan (suitable for born-global entrepreneurs)
2. The traditional-export business plan
3. The Laurel export business plan

### 1. The Back-of-the-Napkin Export Business Plan

**Q:** For what type of people is this plan?

**Ans:** Who are big on ideas and pressed for time and want to get to market fast. 

**Q:** Is this plan good?

**Ans:** While it’s typically short and sweet, it serves a better purpose than having *no export business plan at all*. 

**Q:** What is this plan?

**Ans:** A back-of-the-napkin export business plan can be as simple as explaining what the business does, what you want to do next export-wise, and how you are going to get there (who is going to be on board).

**Q:** Give examples to show how a *back-of-the-napkin* plan looks like?

**Ans:**

1. “We make the absolute-best purple widgets  on the planet.” (widget = a small gadget or mechanical device.)
2. “We will export purple widgets.”
3. “We will export purple widgets to France.”
4. “We will consider making other type widgets, say in red, if a customer in France is large enough to justify the change.”
5. “Suzy, Ted, Mike, and I will work on this initiative.”
6. “We will export, at a minimum, twenty thousand purple widgets within the first year.”
7. “We will not reduce efforts from our domestic business to apply them to the export business.”
8. “We will figure out how much money we need and when we need it.”
9. “We will finance the exports of purple widgets with profits from our domestic business.”
10. “We will find our own customers directly via our Web site, blog, and Facebook.”
11. “We will consult with our banker to provide payment options on all export sales.”
12. “We will have fun in the export journey to success!”


**Q:** What is the first step for creating *back-of-the-napkin* plan?

**Ans:** Add a Web site link to show what the business does and provide an executive summary that includes the founder’s bio and the key team members, and you’re done.

### 2. The Traditional Export Business Plan

**Q**: What is *traditional export business plan*?

**Ans:** It’s important to have a business plan, but you don’t have to reinvent the wheel to create one. One place to visit and bookmark online is the Small Business Administration’s “Export Business Planner” (http://www.sba.gov/exportbusinessplanner). It is a free, customizable tool for small-business owners who are exploring exporting. When you are using the planner, you can refer to Getting Started: Creating an Export Business Plan. It outlines the following (in Chapter 12, we guide you on market research so don’t overly challenge yourself if you can’t answer all the questions at the initial planning stage):

1. Profiling Your Current Business
    1. Identify current successes.
    2. Determine competitive advantages.
    3. Evaluate companywide commitment.
2. Conducting an Industry Analysis
    1. Find export data available on your industry.
    2. Research how competitive your industry is in the global markets.
    3. Assess your industry’s international growth potential.
    4. Research government market studies.
3. Identifying Products with Export Potential
    1. Select the most exportable products/services that your company will offer internationally.
    2. Evaluate the product/services(s) that your company will offer internationally.
4. Marketability: Matching Your Product/Service with a Global Trend or Need
    1. Classify your product.
    2. Find countries with the best-suited markets for your product.
    3. Determine which foreign markets will be the easiest to penetrate.
    4. Define and narrow down those export markets you intend to pursue.
    5. Talk to your US customers or other companies who are doing business internationally.
    6. Research export efforts of US competitors.
5. Determining Market Expansion Benefits/Trade-Offs
    1. Assess the benefits to exporting.
    2. Determine the trade-offs to exporting.
6. Identifying Markets to Pursue
    1. Select the top three most penetrable markets.
7. Conducting an Export Marketing and Sales Analysis
    1. Come up with an overall marketing strategy.
    2. Figure out sales strategies.
    3. Write a detailed product or service description.
    4. Map out the product life cycle.
    5. Make a list of copyrights, patents, and trade secrets.
    6. Determine research and development activities.
8. Short-and Long-Term Goals
    1. Define short-term goals.
    2. Define long-term goals.
    3. Develop an action plan with timelines to reach your short-term goals.

**Q:** What is the most difficult aspect in developing an export business?

**Ans:** Determining the demand for a product or service offering in a foreign country.

**Q:** What thing you can decide easily?

**Ans:** You can know easily which product can be sold in a market. 

**Q:** What is difficult?

**Ans:** It is a different ballgame when it comes to forecasting how much you can sell and over what time frame.

**Q:** What is the simplest rule to forecast how much you can sell and over what time frame? 

**Ans:** Assume that the demand for a product develops in direct proportion to the economic development in each country. This might be a useful way to think about it, especially when data might be *unknown8.


### Where do you want to go?

**Q:** What is the length of the text of the analysis of markets?

**Ans:** Keep your analysis of markets that you want to pursue to one page and break it into four
manageable parts (A, B, C, and D):  
**A.** Select the top-three most penetrable overseas markets that appear to have the best potential for your product or service offering.  
**B.** Analyze the market factors and conditions in each of the selected countries.    
**C.** Determine the pros/cons to conducting business in each market.    
**D.** Select one market to get started!

**Q:** Why should the text of the analysis of market be of one page?

**Ans:** The purpose of this exercise is to establish a broad scope for your research-market analysis but not so broad that you overwhelm yourself. Try to begin with the end in mind.

**Q:** What is it to begin with the end in mind?  
**Ans:** It means:
1. Where do you want to go?
2. How will you know that you have arrived?

**Q:** What is the part first of the market analysis? (It is called Part A)

**Ans:** Select the top-three most penetrable overseas markets that appear to have the best potential for your product or service offering. 

**Q:** How to do part A?  
**Ans:** You can conduct market research online; meet in person with an international trade expert (see the SBA’s “US Export Assistance Centers”: http://www.sba.gov/content/us-export-assistance-centers); or test your product or service by exhibiting at a local trade show. Trade shows give you access to potential customers from all over the world without you having to analyze a thing. For example, if you sell hardware tools and exhibit at a hardware show and find that you get a lot of interest from attendees from a particular foreign market, such as Australia, you would know there must be a market there, because why else would these attendees be asking for information? From there, you can address those inquiries, learn as you grow, and conduct further research. (TODO: find qs and anss in this para) [2022-02-19 Sat 18:34] 

**Q:** What is the part B of the market analysis?  
**Ans:** Analyze the market factors and conditions in each of the selected countries.

**Q:** How to analyze the market factors and conditions in each of the selected countries? (Part B of market analysis.)   
**Ans:** 
- Delve into each country further by reviewing cultural attributes, geographical characteristics, political stability, demographic characteristics, market size, and growth rates. The goal here is to conduct a sound assessment of a foreign market. 
- What might the barriers be? What makes it a good market to enter? 
- How will the local culture influence the sales of your product or service offering? 

Such in-depth market research information is necessary to make sound marketing decisions and it must be done with each new market entry.

**Q:** How to determine the pros/cons to conducting business in each market? (Part C of market analysis.)    
**Ans:**
- Look at potential language barriers, legal restrictions, logistical challenges, and payment problems that might get in the way of doing business in a particular market. Include all relevant variables in your assessment. 
- Do an analysis of your company’s own strengths and weaknesses in a selected market. 
- Will your product or service offering be in the low-, middle-, or high-end pricing level? 
- Is there a similar product or service offering currently available in the selected market? If so, who is making it? Where are they based? Can you compete? Why would you? How would you? 
- The more pros you have for entering a new market, the better your chance for success. 
- If you can draw on the perspective of a native (better yet, an actual prospective customer) of the country where you are keenly interested in doing business, do so. Nothing beats an on-the-ground assessment.

**Q:** How to select one market to get started? (Part D of market analysis.)    
**Ans:** 
- Now you are ready to interpret your findings in light of the stated objective: where do you want to go and how will you know that you have arrived? (This gets back to the back-of-the-napkin plan.) 
- At this juncture, you should have enough data and experience (from going to trade shows, for example) to decide which market is best for you to begin in. 
- Hold off on the other two countries and don’t start doing business with them until after you have a proven success with the first overseas market. If the first selected market doesn’t work right away, say after six months or a year, move on to market No. 2, and so on. Don’t muddy the waters. You don’t want to do too many things at once because you will end up not doing any of them right.

**Q:** You decide the best market for business. And also you have decided market two and market three. How long should the best first market be used for business?    
**Ans:** The first market should be used until you have a proven success in that market. If after 6 months or 1 year you could not make business with this market then you should move to next best market. *But the next market must not be used before this.*

### 3. The Laurel Export Business Plan (LEBP)

The Laurel export business plan (LEBP) — has worked well for many of my clients. 

You can focus on each section heading and then build out accordingly based on the questions I pose and comments I make. What many clients experience as they develop an export plan is the eureka moment: “I can do this!” The trick is to craft a plan that suits you and can absorb economic shifts and shocks along the way yet still allow for you to achieve successful results. And it can’t hurt for you to use both the traditional business export and Laurel export plans to develop yours. (TODO: make qs in this para) [2022-02-19 Sat 19:01] 

> **Tip** 
It is important to identify where the cash will come from to support your export operation. Conduct a complete audit of your cash situation so you are not surprised later on to learn you need more money than anticipated to reach a new overseas market. Face weak links and potential problems before you are knee deep in a fantastic opportunity. 

**Q:** What can surprise you when you are deep in a fantastic opportunity?    
**Ans:** There can be shortage of cash. So you mush face weak links and potential problems.

**Q:** What are the parts of the Laurel export business plan?    
**Ans:** 
1. *Introduction*: Compose an explanation why you should export and what your company wants to gain from exporting. Your answers will serve as your guiding light and foundation for your entire export business plan.
> a. Why you should export?    
> b. What your company wants to gain from exporting?
2. *Executive Summary*: Specify your long-term financial and non-financial vision for developing an export business. Think three, five, and ten years out. This part shows clarity of purpose, direction, and intent. It is an understanding of the company’s identity and a short, concise picture of the company in the future. Think of it as an entire business plan in miniature.
3. *Strategic Leadership*: State your leadership ability clearly. Do you have what it takes to drive results for your export operation? (Refer to Chapter 1 for a refresher on the global mindset.) The business owner must have the ability to set direction, make decisions, and provide long-term planning.
4. *Company Description*: Explain what do you do and why are you good at it.
5. *Target Export Market*: Identify your customers in ________________ (pick a target export market). Think about what would motivate them to pay for your product or service and if they will be able to afford to pay for your product or service. Drill down to a more precise view of your target audience.
6. *The Competitive Analysis (Market and Customer)*: Distinguish how your product or service is unique, and explain briefly why people in a selected export market would buy it. Do you know the strengths, weaknesses, strategies, opportunities, threats, and financial status of your top five competitors? Spell them out.
7. *Marketing and Sales Plan*: Detail and clarify how you will effectively and efficiently reach the people with whom you want to connect through your business (direct, indirect, intermediary sales, trade shows, e-commerce, mobile, etc.). Ensure existing local customers are not neglected! Are your products and services suitable for an export market or will major modifications be required? This part should be strategic in that it outlines specific action steps to achieve future sales goals.
8. *Operations Plan*: Figure out how you will support the business strategies through internal operations, systems, and organizational structures. Describe key factors to use in your business in finding solutions and in meeting the wants and needs of customers, suppliers, employees and other key influencers. If exporting a product, how will it get made? Do you have the capacity to produce and deliver?
9. *Information Technology Plan*: State how you will leverage technology to take advantage of the export marketplace. Will your export business be heavily dependent on technology? List your business’s strengths and weaknesses in the information technology area. IT will support your company’s business processes and decision making and, at the same time, give it an extreme competitive advantage in the global marketplace. Plan the parts of your business you will use technology for (order taking, mailing lists, social media, finances, e-commerce sales) and how you will use it.
10. *Logistics Plan*: Outline how you will get your product or service to the chosen export market.
11. *Management Structure*: Identify the people and experts in your business who will implement your plan and exceed your goals. Compile a management team section that describes who is on your team and what expertise each person brings to the table. This section should also include an analysis of strengths and weaknesses in the team and what might be missing.
12. *Future Development*: Tailor your business plan by defining future milestones that are in line with your desired goals. Describe your vision for your business, including your *exit strategy*.
13. *Financials (Export Budget)*: Analyze your available resources (human, material, and financial) to determine how you will support export initiatives. Get together three types of financial statements: a cash-flow statement, an income statement (also referred to as a profit/loss statement), and a balance sheet. Set budget targets and develop pricing strategies. Confront your company’s finances squarely. You want your export business to be sustainable over the long term.
14. *Strategy Implementation*: How will you follow up, review, and measure results? Have you set a timeline? Home in on a detailed action plan for execution.




**Q:** What view must you have of your customers?

**Ans:**    
**Caution:** Are you crystal clear on who your customers are and why they use your product or service? If not, go back and do a major rethink!

**You must be crystal clear on who your customers are**

**Q:** What is the tip for your *export dream team*?    
**Ans:**    
**Tip** Have your export dream team (EDT) review your plan so that they can seek external sources of advice, test it, and hold you accountable and responsible for implementing it.

**Q:** When you export business grow, what experience do you gain?    
**Ans:** As your export business grows, you will become more aware of *external factors* that influence your business plan, which will allow you to develop ways to manage and adapt to them. These external factors might include: 
1. import regulations
2. exchange rates
3. availability of finance
4. new or unexpected competition, and disruptive technology and logistics    

The above factors are to name just a few. As mentioned earlier, anticipating change and adapting to it requires strategic leadership as well as Backup Plans B, C, and D.

*key word*: Strategic leadership, Backup plans B, C, and D.

[2022-02-20 Sun 21:53] 

**Q:** What is the summary of the chapter 02?    
**Ans:**

**Summary: Leaving You with Fun and Export Adventure on Your Mind**

You should express and experience the passion you have for exporting in the crafting of your export business plan. If that enthusiasm is not there, reconsider what you are attempting to do. It might not be the right time. Individuals e-mail me on a weekly basis saying, “Here’s what I want to do in the export market . . . .” Then they ask me: “Will it work?” My response: “I don’t know. It depends on you.” (Reread Chapter 1!) This brings us back to the goal of this chapter: creating an export business plan that meets your needs and serves the life of your business.
Now that you know what is involved, craft your own export business plan and use it as a tool for building your export business—and don’t forget to maximize profits! Look at it regularly, revise it when necessary, and pay attention to the reality of the market. It will sharpen what you are doing, why you are doing it, and help you define and achieve professional and personal goals.
